In this lesson, we will be covering
packages, package managers, and
how to find, install, and remove software
for the most popular Linux distributions.
Typically, when you install software in
a Linux system you do so with a package.
A package is just a collection of
files that make up an application.
Additionally a package contains data about
the application as well as any steps
required to successfully install and
remove that application.
The data or
metadata that is contained within
a package can include such information as
the description of the application, the
version and the list of dependencies or
other packages that this particular
application needs in order to function.
A package manager is used to install,
upgrade, and remove packages.
The package manager uses
a package's metadata to
automatically install any
required dependencies.
Package managers keep track of what
files belong to what packages,
what packages are installed, and what
versions of those packages are installed.
Here is a list of distributions that
are based on the RPM package format.
RPM stands for RedHat Package Manager.
Obviously, the RedHat distribution
uses RPMs, as well as,
CentOS, Fedora, Oracle Linux,
and Scientific Linux.
The yum command line utility is
a packaged management program for
those Linux distributions
that use RPM packages.
You can find packages to install with yum
search and provide that a search string.
You can also display
information about a package or
an application by using yum,
info and the package name.
You can install packages with
the yum install package command.
Yum will typically ask you to
review your request and say yes or
no if you want to continue.
To automatically answer yes
to yum's question use -y.
Also note that installing or
removing software requires root or
super user privileges.
To remove a package, it's simply yum
remove and the name of the package.
In addition to the yum command,
you can also use the rpm command to
interact with a package manager.
Rpm -qa lists all the installed packages.
Rpm -qf with a path to a file will tell
you what package that file belongs to.
Using rpm -ql package name
will list all the files
that belong to that particular package.
To install a package,
use rpm -ivh and the package file.
To erase or uninstall a package,
use rpm -e with a package name.
Let's look for an application to install.
Let's look for something called inkscape.
So we'll do a search.
And then we see three items returned.
Let's do yum info on each one of those and
see what they do inkscape-docs.
It says it's a tutorial and
examples for Inkscape.
That's not what we're looking for,
let's look at the next one.
Two is Inkscape.
And that says it's a graphics editor so
that is the package that we want.
So in order to install or
remove software we need root privileges.
We can use sudo if that's configured or
we can also just switch to the root user.
Now I'll just switch to root and use
adminuser as the password for this server.
Then we'll do yum install inkscape.
So is it okay to download this?
Yes it is.
I'll hit y and Enter.
All right, it's says it
installed their package there.
You can also use yum install with a -y,
so you don't have to answer
y to the question here.
We'll do this with another
piece of software called GIMP.
And you can see that this
has several dependencies,
so it not only installs the application,
but it installs the other packages that
are required for GIMP to run properly.
Okay, let's look in our
applications list for graphics,
and you can see that Inkscape and
GIMP has been installed on our system.
Let's remove some
software with yum remove.
We'll do this to GIMP.
And then like install you could use
-y to answer yes automatically.
I'll just do it manually here.
And it says it erased that package.
Let's look.
Applications, graphics and
GIMP is no longer showing up in our menu.
Let's say there's some software that you
want to install that's not included in
the package manager.
Let's look for Dropbox.
So you can't use yum to install Dropbox,
or at least directly, so
we'll go to dropbox.com.
Download the RPM.
Let's save them, this directory here.
So, we can install an rpm with -i for
install, v is verbose,
and h says print some hash
marks to show our progress.
So we'll just do that here.
We'll answer OK.
Dropbox was successfully installed.
So, can see.
There it is, Dropbox.
We installed Dropbox.
You could also use rpm to do some queries.
So, we'll use rpm -qa to
query all packages, or
to list all packages that
are installed on the system.
And then when we do this we can see
that they're in no particular order.
We'll sort the list so
it makes it easier for us to read.
We'll sort it and pipe it to a pager so
we can look at it one page at a time.
And there we go.
Yeah, all the way to the end,
you can see yum, zlib, etc.
So, you can also ask rpm what
file a package belongs to.
So the program which
lives at user bin which.
We'll ask rpm what package
does that belong to.
And it's the which package.
You can also say show me all the files or
list all the files that
are in that package.
We'll just give it the package name.
And you can see that user bin which,
in addition to these other files,
are contained in that particular package.
Another popular package format
is the Debian package format.
In addition to Debian, distributions like
Linux Mint and Ubuntu use DEB packages.
The Debian base distributions use
a package manager called APT.
The advance packaging tool.
APT is comprised of a few
small utilities with
the two most commonly used ones
being apt -cache and apt-get.
To search for packages, use apt-cache
search, and the search string.
To install the package, use apt-get,
install and the package name.
You can use -y to automatically answer
yes to any of apt-get's questions.
To remove a package, use apt-get remove.
If there are any configuration files,
or configuration changes,
those will stay on your
system with apt-get remove.
However, if you wanna get rid of the
configuration in addition to the package,
you can use apt-get purge package.
To show information about a particular
package, use apt-cache show and
the package name.
In addition to the app utilities,
you can use the dpkg command to
interact with the package manager.
Dpkg -l lists the installed packages.
Dpkg space -S and
a path to a file, will display
the package that the file belongs to.
Dpkg with a -L lists all
the files in a package.
And to install a package,
use dpkg space -i and the .deb file.
Here we are on an Ubuntu system.
Let's use app to look for
and install some software.
Look for inkscape and the first result
returned there looks like what we want.
Let's take a look at it
with app cache show.
Give some information about the package,
its dependencies, its description.
So we will install that
with apt-get install.
And installing and removing
software requires root privileges.
You can get root privileges by using
the sudo command, that's one way.
You can also switch to the root account.
Do I want to continue?
Yes, we'll install this software.
Okay now the software
installation is done.
We can see if we can find it.
And, sure enough,
we can see that it's installed.
You can also just answer yes
to apt's question with a -y.
So, we'll go ahead and
install GIMP this way.
Okay GIMP is installed.
Now we can see there it is.
So we'll go ahead and just remove it.
We'll do app-get remove.
Again we need root privileges to add or
remove software.
And GIMP is now gone from the system.
Let's look at that stalling
software from a .deb file.
I'm on Ubuntu here.
Let's download the .deb for Ubuntu.
Going to use dpkg-i to
do the installation.
And Dropbox is installed.
We can use dpkg -l to list
all the installed packages.
Let's see, let's use dpg -S and
see which file,
which package the which
command belongs to.
It belongs to the debianutils package,
so we can look at
all the files in the debianutils
package with the -L command.
Let's, yeah, you can see at
the very bottom, user bin which.
Packages are used to install
software on Linux systems.
You can manipulate packages
with a package manager.
Two of the most package
formats are RPM and Debian.
For RPN based distributions, use the yum
and RPM commands to manage packages.
For Debian based distributions use apt and
dpkg to manage packages